CyberFundamentals Maturity Level description

The following describes the different CyberFundamentals Maturity levels on a holistic
manner and is meant as a guidance during assessments. Although during
assessments two approaches have to be considered, documentation and
implementation, the following gives insight in how the maturity levels are understood
as a whole.

The 5 CyberFundamentals Maturity Levels are:

*  CyFun(r) Level 1 - Initial
*  CyFun(r) Level 2 - Repeatable
*  CyFun(r) Level 3 - Defined
*  CyFun(r) Level 4 - Managed
*  CyFun(r) Level 5 - Optimizing

What is important in the CyberFundamentals Framework is that each maturity level
builds on the previous maturity level. Cybersecurity practices in a previous maturity
level are therefore considered as established.

CyFun(r) Level 1 - Initial
Key elements: Process unpredictable, reactive, not documented & poorly controlled

Safeguards or countermeasures are not embedded in documented processes, which
justifies the conclusion that cybersecurity controls (e.g. imposed via contract or
sectoral requirements) are not implemented.

There is a lack or total absence of governance and cybersecurity-related
interventions are mainly limited to "break/fix" work.

There is no evidence of due diligence to demonstrate compliance with applicable
legal, regulatory and/or contractual obligations.

CyFun(r) Level 2 - Repeatable
Key elements: Ad Hoc Processes, mostly informal, project oriented & often reactive

Cybersecurity practices are "ad hoc" and when a control is met, it often lacks
consistency and formality.

Cybersecurity practices tend to be project-oriented (driven by requirements set by a
specific project) where the intent of the respective controls is met in most cases, but
where the practice is not standardised across the organisation. Here, cybersecurity
practices are mainly focused on specific systems, networks, applications or
processes for which controls need to be implemented for a compliance need and
often limited to a specific period in time. The latter could result in practices that are
not reviewed and updated in the previous 2 years.

There is evidence of diligence to demonstrate compliance with specific legal,
regulatory and/or contractual obligations, but limited to the projects where this is
required.

Version: 2024-03-29

Page 1 of 3

TLP: GREEN



CyberFundamentals Maturity Level description

Implementation is dependent on specific knowledge and effort of the person
performing the task(s), where implementation of these practices may be a single
point of failure and not proactively addressed.

It could be stated that due to their project orientation, CyFun(r) Level 2 cybersecurity
practices focus on compliance rather than security and therefore have rarely been
rolled out organisation-wide.

CyFun(r) Level 3 - Defined
Key elements: Formal processes, organisation oriented & proactive

Cybersecurity practices are standardised "organisation-wide" and implemented
according to formally defined and approved processes. Controls are implemented
according to documented and approved procedures.

Exceptions are documented, justified and approved. The number of exceptions from
organisation-wide and standardised cybersecurity practices are limited to less than
5% of the total number of processes.

Assessment of the processes shows that less than 10% of the processes have a
deviation from the anticipated outcome of those processes.

CyFun(r) Level 3 cybersecurity practices focus on security over compliance.
Compliance can reasonably be seen as a "natural by-product" of cybersecurity
practices.

There is adequate evidence of due diligence to demonstrate compliance with specific
legal, regulatory and/or contractual obligations.

CyFun(r) Level 4 - Managed
Key elements: Formal processes, organisation oriented, controlled, proactive &

measured

Cybersecurity practices build further on the CyFun(r) Level 3 maturity criteria and are
"metrics-driven" to provide management insight into the cybersecurity status of the
organisation.

Exceptions to organisation-wide implemented cybersecurity practices are limited to
less than 3% of total processes, and are documented, justified and approved.

Detailed performance metrics are collected, analysed and reported. This leads to a
quantitative understanding of process capabilities and an ability to predict
performance.

Assessment of the processes shows that less than 5% of the processes have a
deviation from the anticipated outcome of those processes.

Business stakeholders (top management, board of directors...) are aware of the
cyber security status of the organisation (through e.g. regular management reviews),
where situational awareness is supported by detailed metrics.

Version: 2024-03-29

Page 2 of 3

TLP: GREEN



CyberFundamentals Maturity Level description

CyFun(r) Level 5 - Optimizing
Key elements: Formal processes, organisation oriented, controlled, proactive,

measured & continual improvement focus

Cybersecurity practices build on established CyFun(r) Level 4 maturity criteria and are
time-sensitive to support operational efficiency, which may include automated actions
(e.g. through machine learning or artificial intelligence (AI)).

Exceptions to organisation-wide implemented cybersecurity practices are limited to
less than 0.5% of total processes, and are documented, justified and approved.

Quantitative performance objectives (targets) for process effectiveness and efficiency
are set, based on the organisation's business goals.

Assessment of the processes shows that less than 1% of the processes have a
deviation from the anticipated outcome of those processes.

Process improvements are implemented according to "continuous improvement"
practices to influence process change.

The above is based on interpretations contained in the Secure Controls Framework -
Cybersecurity & Data Privacy Capability Maturity Model (C|P-CMM).

Figure: CyberFundamentals Maturity Level Overview

Version: 2024-03-29

Page 3 of 3

TLP: GREEN





