Description of impact levels High, Medium and Low

Impact Level HIGH

The threat is expected to have serious or catastrophic disruptive effects on organisations' network and information systems (economic), organisations' assets
(financial), individuals (health, privacy, daily life, well-being), the nation (security and public order) or the functioning of international institutions on Belgian territory.
Serious or catastrophic disruptive impact means that the threat has an impact as below:

Healthcare

Over 200 (1) dead, chronically ill or with
long-term disability

*  Over 75.000 (3) people with short-term health problems.
*  Severe environmental pollution affecting our country's natural habitat.

Description

Personal sphere

Loss of personal data of more than
1.000.000 persons (GDPR Art 4.)

Daily life

Wellbeing

Financial

Significant Impact on daily life of
75.000 (2) people
Impact on welfare (e.g. housing, provision
of food and drinking water) for more than
75.000 people
Financial impact of minimum EUR 1.500 (3)
on 75.000 people.

Individuals may face significant consequences, which they should be able to overcome, albeit with
serious difficulties (misappropriation of funds, blacklisting by financial institutions, property damage,
loss of employment, summons, deterioration in health, etc.)

Ecological contamination with long-term effects on more than 75.000 people.

*  Critical damage to organisations' assets.
*  Critical financial losses in organisations.
*  Impact on more than 25% of the essential services in the sector.
*  Severe deterioration or reduction in the ability to perform the organisation's mission such that the

Economics

Loss of more than 0.1% of GDP

organisation cannot perform one or more of its primary functions.

*  Destruction of essential infrastructure.
*  Serious threat to economic prosperity.
*  Difficulties for the state, and even an inability, to secure a regulatory function or one of its vital

missions.

Security and
public order

National impact on the protection of the
state and services that ensure security
and public order

*  There is serious reputational damage to the state. There is risk of loss of confidence in the state

creating fear, uncertainty and doubt.

*  Protection of the achievements of the democratic rule of law and its shared values is no longer

International
Institutions

Significant impact on the operation of
international institutions on Belgian
territory

assured.

*  The physical security of citizens and the physical integrity of our country is no longer assured.

*  International order based on international law and multilateral frameworks is no longer assured.
*  The effective functioning of the European Union is no longer assured.

Version: 2023-07-10

Page 1 of 3








Description of impact levels High, Medium and Low

Impact Level MEDIUM

Description
The threat is expected to have serious disruptive consequences on organisations' network and information systems ( economically), organisations' assets (financially),
individuals (health, privacy, daily life and wellbeing), the nation (security and public order) or the functioning of international institutions on Belgian territory. Serious
disruptive consequence means that the threat has an impact as below:

Healthcare

Substantial harm to persons not involving
deaths or serious life-threatening injuries.

*  Individuals may experience significant discomfort, which they overcome despite some

difficulties (fear, misunderstanding, stress, minor physical ailments, etc.).
*  Major environmental pollution threatening our country's natural habitat.

Personal sphere

Loss of personal data of more than 20.000
persons (GDPR Art 4.)

Individuals may experience considerable inconvenience, which they overcome despite
some difficulties (additional costs, denial of access to business services, fear,
misunderstanding, etc.).

Daily life

Wellbeing

Financial

Economics

Security and public order

International Institutions

Significant Impact on daily life of
15.000 (2) people
Impact on welfare (e.g. housing, provision of
food and drinking water) for more than
15.000 people
Financial impact of minimum EUR 1.500 (3) on
15.000 people.
*  A significant deterioration in the ability to perform the mission of organisations to the extent and duration that the organisation

*  Significant damage to organisations' assets.
*  Significant financial losses in organisations.

Ecological contamination with long-term effects on more than 15.000 people.

concerned is able to perform its primary functions, but the effectiveness of those functions is significantly reduced.

*  Destruction of important but not essential infrastructure.
*  Economic prosperity is threatened.
Inability for organisations or the state to ensure all or part of its activities (including the operation of the Intelligence and Security
Services), with potentially serious consequences for the security of persons and property.
*  The international order based on international law and multilateral frameworks is under threat.
*  The effective functioning of the European Union is compromised.
*  The effective functioning of international institutions on Belgian territory is compromised.

Version: 2023-07-10

Page 2 of 3











Description of impact levels High, Medium and Low

Impact Level LOW

The threat is expected to have a limited disruptive effect on organisations' network and information systems, with a limited impact on organisations' operations,
organisations' assets, the nation or the functioning of international institutions on Belgian territory.
A limited disruptive effect means, for example, that the threat: (i) affects the ability to carry out an organisation's mission to such an extent that the organisation is
able to perform its primary functions, but noticeably reduces the effectiveness of these functions; (ii) may result in minor damage to organisations' assets; (iii) may
result in minor financial losses; (iv) may result in minor damage to individuals, or individuals may experience some minor inconveniences, which they overcome
without difficulty (time needed to re-enter information, annoyances, irritations, etc.).

Description

(1) Average capacity of aircraft and train
(2) 0.6% of total population (referring to German model)
(3) Minimum monthly wage

Sources
OES_Criteria_V6_0_EN Indicative And Non-Binding Impact Matrix For Identification Of Providers Of Essential Services
ENISA - On-line tool for the security of personal data processing
NIST Special Publication 800-30 Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments September 2012
ISO/IEC 27005:2022 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection - Guidance on managing information security risks

Version: 2023-07-10

Page 3 of 3









